Chapter 1

Mohamed bin Zayed's Role in the UAE's Rise and Power-Building

It is traditionally common for small states to be regarded as being on the margins of international relations. However, this chapter seeks to challenge this assumption by reviewing developments in the field of international relations, particularly with regard to changes in the concept of "power" employing the example of the United Arab Emirates.

In this chapter, we will discuss how the UAE has sought, since the 1990s, to acquire and expand soft and hard power capabilities. The UAE President, HH Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, has played a pivotal role in this trajectory. Chapter also presents the UAE as a model of how a small state can transcend its peripheral role by building these capabilities to play an influential regional role, while also employing foreign policy to boost the country's share of power distribution in the Middle East, and actively contribute to shaping regional policies.

In a globalized world with an increasingly complex and pluralistic international order seeking reformation and rewriting of the rules that govern it, some small countries have found themselves in position to exercise influence beyond their geography or population, depending on their ability to employ their resources, capabilities and alliances to their benefit whilst also exploiting both globalization and the geostrategic transformations occurring in the regional and international orders. This has given them more power to influence the international order and render it more pluralistic and flexible. In such cases, small states are able to expand their roles and act more effectively to guide their regional orders to better serve their interests.



Small states are traditionally preoccupied with overcoming

weaknesses to ensure their survival. Therefore, to link this with the pursuit of an influential regional role and a respected position in terms of global governance standards offers a different proposition for how small states - particularly those with wealth and forward- looking leaderships - can protect themselves, enhance their interests, and increase their weight and influence by making the best use of their financial and economic resources and diplomatic tools. At home, this will also contribute to building the nation, cementing social cohesion, strengthening stability and achieving the enhancing status of a superpower ally.2

The UAE has built its image as a regional financial center, a hub for logistics and re-export services, and an ideal destination for trade, investment, work and quality of life. Therefore, ultimately, stability provides the essence of the country's security strategy. The more its international relations flourish, the more its stability
becomes a matter of international interest. This runs in parallel with the UAE's success in strengthening its external image as a reliable partner for major world powers, especially the United States. Therefore, the international order would appear to offer countries that have resilient, visionary and forward-thinking leaderships ample opportunities for influence, activism and participation. But how did the UAE benefit from this?

"Micro-Power' Diplomacy

International relations scholars cite "micro-power" as a new diplomatic construct of the 21t century. When applied to the UAE case, author and economist Mike O'Sullivan asserts that the country has - in addition to its regional role - important assets in the form of its wealth and "reputation for vision."

Other scholars call for a reconsideration of the traditional link between a state's size and its power, and argue that :itis more useful to use qualitative rather than quantitative criteria in comparing powers of states. Spyridon N. Litsas, professor of international relations at the University of Macedonia, argues that the size of a country does not always determine its relative strength in the international arena, citing many cases which show that size is not necessarily relevant to power. He notes that "Great Britain was never a physical giant, but nevertheless managed to establish a global empire on which the sun never set, through effective diplomacy, efficient private economic institutions (e.g., the East India Company) and a fearsome navy." At the other end of the spectrum, China, despite its geographical and demographic size, suffered what is described as "100 years of
humiliation"; while the former Soviet Union, which Litsas describes as "a territorial giant with economic glass legs" was "defeated by the physically smaller but economically and technologically much more advanced United States." Litsas indicates that when applying this to small countries such as the UAE, the comparison becomes a convenient instrument for comprehending the qualitative characteristics of any state, instead of the quantitative ones. "This is important, because quality, unlike quantity, never gives a false indication of either strength or weakness." Therefore, Litsas describes the UAE (and Israel) as a model for a "smart" state rather than small one, stressing that its strong economy; investment in artificial intelligence, advanced technology and soft power capabilities; focus on flexible diplomacy; and keen awareness of the changes in the international environment all elevate its status. He adds that a smart state is a rational actor on the international arena.

The UAE has chosen to become a committed and trustworthy partner of the United States to ensure its access to hard power and a decisive role. This is the result of concerted efforts that began in the 1990s, preceded by the country's endeavors to develop its soft power capabilities and its successful integration into the global economy.

This strategic approach indicates that there was little delay in the UAE leadership's response and adaptation to the shifts in the international order and its politics since the 1990s to date. The strategies and policies pursued by the UAE over the past decades
have demonstrated the country's flexible and preemptive approach in absorbing these shifts and in pursuit of multi-faceted, integrated and comprehensive power-building.


Mohamed bin Zayed and Hard Power Development

When we approach the power-building model of any nation, it is common sense to raise a question about who stands behind this process. It seems that focusing on internal factors, especially the political leadership element, is in line with the objective handling of this question which includes building soft and hard power, the incorporation of their effects to build smart power that will be highlighted in the following segment.

Over the past decades, UAE President Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed - since becoming Chief of Staff of the UAE armed forces in 1993 and serving as the right hand of the founding father, the late Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan AlI Nahyan - has sought to modernize the UAE armed forces, diversify sources of armament, expand the country's network of regional and international relations and enhance its regional role and its distinguished regional and global status.
In fact, we cannot, in anyway, discuss the leading Emirati model in the region without talking about the central role of Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed in building and developing this model and overcoming hardships SO that this model could rise and grow.
As HH Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid al Maktoum, vice- president, prime minister of the UAE and ruler of Dubai, said when he pledged allegiance to Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed as president:
knowledge-sharing supports the UAE's ambition to be recognized as an influential power.10 Achieving this ambition, however, might need breaking down barriers despite the fact that there might be some strategic risks, says Dr. Anwar Gargash, diplomatic advisor to the UAE president. 

Military experts and strategic analysts believe that the UAE Armed Forces have emerged as the most effective and professional in the region over the past two decades. Former US Secretary of Defense James Mattis went sO far as to refer to the UAE as "Little Sparta. 

The UAE Air Force has played an active role in Emirati military operations, including the one in Afghanistan, and in Operation "Inherent Resolve" (against ISIS in Iraq and Syria), as well as other operations in Libya and in Yemen. 
Indeed, the UAE's involvement in the military conflict in Yemen since 2015 as part of the Arab Coalition to Support Yemeni Legitimacy represents a major turning point in the role of the country's hard power in two important ways:

First, the UAE military managed to develop regionally atypical levels of military effectiveness. This became evident in mid-2015 when UAE forces retook Aden, Yemen's principal port city in the south, from the Houthi militias. To accomplish this feat, the UAE
undertook a highly complex amphibious operation. Moreover, UAE pilots have demonstrated unusually adept skills in Yemen and elsewhere, for example by flying at low altitudes to minimize collateral damage. Also, the UAE army was the first Arab army to carry out complex and coordinated close-quarter military operations in hostile areas of the conflict.

Second, from a nation-building perspective, the UAE linked this first war outside its borders with promoting national awareness and identity. The unprecedented martyrdom of dozens of Emirati soldiers in the city of Ma'rib in Yemen in 2015 helped nurture a culture of martyrdom and sacrifice for the sake of the homeland, which became an essential part of interactions between the government and the people. The construction of Wahat Al Karama, the UAE's national memorial, in the capital city of Abu Dhabi in November 2015 was a physical and symbolic sign of the increasing importance given to the sacrifices of soldiers in the UAE national discourse. 15 Given the role played by militarized nationalism represented by the armed forces, new models of citizenship complementing socio-economic structural changes have been promoted. Emphasis has been placed on community responsibility, duty, service, sacrifice and patriotism, which are values related to the military but can serve also to boost social entrepreneurship and adaptation.


Soft Power Development

The first decade of the 21t century was the most momentous and driven in terms of the UAE's application of its financial resources, prosperity and economic growth, and the vitality ofits young leadership to strengthen and expand its soft and hard power capabilities.

The country's soft power is rooted in the foundation of the federation in 1971. In the first decade of the 21st century, and with record-high oil prices, the UAE - and other Gulf states - entered a new phase of power building. The global financial crisis (2008-2009) was to become a significant milestone in this path to transformation.

Perhaps the most basic indicators of the UAE's power-building drive include the following:

1. The UAE was ranked the most significant "soft power" nation in the Middle East in 2020, 2021,17 and 2022. 18

2. The UAE is the second largest Arab economy and the third largest in the Middle East.19

3. The UAE accounts for 6% of the world's proven crude oil reserves.

4. The total value of assets owned by Emirati sovereign wealth funds - a total of six funds - has increased to $1.402 trillion (AED 5.2 trillion) by the end of 2021, according to the Sovereign Wealth Fund Institute (SWFI). The total assets of UAE sovereign funds account for 15% of the total assets of world sovereign funds valued at about $9.53 trillion. Thus, the UAE has maintained 2nd
place in the world behind China and 1st place in the region in terms of the total value of assets of its sovereign funds. Norway came in 3rd place, while Singapore ranked in 4th place. 20

5. The UAE is a regional hub for logistics, trade and business. By leveraging trade routes between Asia, Europe and Africa, the UAE's investment in its infrastructure -including ports, airports and roads -has strengthened its position as one of the world's leading logistics hubs.  In the 2020 Soft Power report, which was prepared jointly by the Brand Finance Foundation and the University of Oxford and released during the World Soft Power Summit the same year, reference was made, on the economic level, to the distinguished status of the UAE in the region and globally. This recognition was driven by the country's trade and business environment, its stable and growing economy and the fact that the UAE has become a global destination of choice for doing business.

6. The UAE government received an Aa2 rating in creditworthiness - which is the highest sovereign rating in the region - with a stable outlook for the national economy by the international rating agency, Moody's. In its report on the sovereign credit profile of the UAE, Moody's noted that the UAE's credit strength is supported by the high per capita GDP, internal stability and strong and broad international relations.23 In 2022, Fitch and Moody's gave the UAE a stable outlook.

7. The UAE is a key destination for the conferences and exhibitions industry, as well as for major entertainment and international sporting events.

8. The UAE's free trade zones are the most advanced and developed in the region.

9. Jebel Ali Port in Dubai is the largest, most dynamic and experienced port in the region. The shipping and maritime giant, DP World, is the largest in the Middle East and through acquisitions has grown to become the fourth largest port operator in the world. Other notable logistics players include the Khalifa Port Container Terminal in Abu Dhabi. 25

10. In 2022, the UAE has become the third largest crypto market in the MENA region with transactions valued at about $26 billion. This supports investment in digital industries. 26

11. In May 2022, Google said that Khalifa Tower in Dubai is the most popular building on Google's Street View, followed by Eiffel Tower in Paris and Taj Mahal in India. 27

12. According to the United Nations Development Program (UNDP), the UAE ranked first in the Arab world in the Human Development and Gender Balance Report (2020). The UAE ranks first among Arab countries in the advancement toward bridging the gender gap and striving for gender equality, according to the World
Economic Forum's 2021 Global Gender Gap report.28 The UAE was awarded an "Aa2" sovereign rating for its creditworthiness by Moody's.

13. The UAE is home to the Middle East's leading banks, companies, media channels and platforms.

14. The UAE is the largest Arab investor abroad, and was among the top 20 international investors worldwide in 2019. The country believes that investments abroad reinforce its market diversification strategy and represent a key pillar of support in achieving its ambitious economic goals for the next 50 years.

15. The UAE was among the 10 most competitive countries in the world during 202030 and was also the most competitive in digital infrastructure in the region, according to a report by the Global Competitiveness Center of the International Institute for Management Development in Lausanne, Switzerland, issued in 2020. Alongside its income diversification strategy, this was a key determinant of the UAE's leading position among Arab states in a global index of nations' economic recovery from the effects of COVID-19 (according to 2020 Fall statistics).

16. The UAE was ranked first in the Arab region and 24th in the world, according to the World Happiness Report which is published by the UN's Sustainable Development Solutions Network, powered by the Gallup World Poll data. The World Happiness Report, which covers 146 countries, measures a number of variables, including GDP per capita, healthy life expectancy, freedom, generosity, social support and lack of corruption in government and business. 33

17 . The UAE's airlines - Emirates airlines and Etihad Airways - are among the most prominent and fastest growing in the world, despite the effects of the COVID-19 pandemic.

18. The UAE is the first Arab country to implement a peaceful nuclear energy program, the first in the Arab world to send a scientific mission to Mars (The Hope Orbiter), and is set to become the first in the Arab world (and fourth globally) to send a mission to the moon.

19. Since 2015, the UAE became the first Arab country to receive a waiver from the Schengen visa for its nationals. Moreover, the UAE passport has been ranked as the 1st in the Arab world and 15th most powerful in the world with a visa-free or visa-on- arrival score of 176, according to the latest ranking released by Henley & Partners for the third quarter of 2022. 34

20 . The UAE plays a major role in the preservation and support of Arab culture. The country is home to the largest Arab library
(the Mohammed bin Rashid Library, with more than 1.1 million paper and digital books, more than six million dissertations, some 73,000 musical pieces and 57,000 videos3s). In 1998, the UNESCO Sharjah Prize for Arab Culture was launched. In addition, the Booker Prize for Arabic Fiction, led by the UAE, is the most renowned in the Arab world. Moreover, the country is home to several leading poetry competitions, including: The "Million's Poet" and the "Prince of Poets," launched in 2006 and 2007, respectively. The top prize is worth five million dirhams ($1.36 million), and is considered the highest prize money of any such competition around the world. 36 Sharjah was named by UNESCO as the World Book Capital for the year 2019, and the emirate's "House of Wisdom" library is one of the most developed in the world. Additionally, the UAE is one of the most important UNESCO donors, extending $50 million to the organization to rebuild cultural heritage in Iraq, such as the historical monuments of Mosul, especially Al-Nuri Mosquess, Al-Hadba' or the hunchback minaret, Our Lady of the Hour Church, Al-Tahera Church, and the Mosul library. 

In line with these indices and elements, UAE President, Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, has set seven points of strength which the UAE enjoys in all fields. He has outlined a roadmap in his address to the nation in July 2022 to back up these points to ensure the country's entrepreneurship in all fields by "redoubling our efforts to maintain the UAE's status and elevate its achievements." Following are these points mentioned in the address:

1. At the present, the UAE has an advanced, sustainable and integrated ecosystem that has become an inspiration for people in the region and around the world.

2. Today, the UAE economy is thriving and continues to grow at an impressive rate.

3. The country is blessed with many resources, especially its high- skilled human capital.

4. The UAE enjoys a good reputation regionally and internationally.

5. The UAE is one of the world's leading countries in providing humanitarian aid.

6. The UAE is a reliable energy provider, and is a supporter of global energy security.

7. The UAE champions peace and stability in the region and the wider world, supports others and advocates for wisdom and cooperation for the good of mankind.

These factors reflect the UAE's growing presence and influence in the region and beyond, including among global institutions, with which it has broadened its international partnerships. This, of course, has required the country to meet a number of conditions and standards relating to efficiency and governance - which, in itself, has constituted a catalyst for further progress in the fields of economy, social work, energy and the environment.

As researchers and experts have observed, sovereign wealth funds in the GCC played a crucial role in recapitalizing troubled global financial institutions, such as the International Monetary Fund (IMF), during the early stages of the 2008-2009 financial crisis. In fact, they provided as much as one third of the emergency financing provided by European governments to avert financial meltdown in 2008. This assistance was not provided without conditions, however; Gulf lenders tied their support to reforms of global governance structures seen as unrepresentative of emerging economies.

The success of the Arab Gulf region in supporting the IMF was not the only such story. Indeed, Arab Gulf countries have become increasingly involved in "new frameworks for energy management and international climate change policy" For example, Abu Dhabi won a successful bid to host the headquarters of the International Renewable Energy Agency (IRENA) in 2009 - the first international agency to be headquartered in the Middle East. Likewise, the UAE has expanded its relations with Asian partners, with a $20 billion deal in December 2009 between the Emirates Nuclear Energy Corporation (ENEC) and a consortium led by the South Korea Electric Power Corporation (KEPCO), to build four nuclear power reactors in the western region of Abu Dhabi. This was complemented by number of other strategic and commercial partnerships between the two countries. Other opportunities for cooperation include food security-related agricultural investments in Asia, Africa, Latin America and Australia. Another key point is the Gulf states' ability to reshape the global aviation sector:41 Moreover, GCC countries have gained influence in world sports by investing in renowned European clubs. So, these countries were able to convert their "growing expertise and financial wealth into a power to be reckoned with in the global sport industry which is one of the emerging sectors in terms of creating opportunities to achieve a good revenue, diversify investments and cement the moral stash for these countries in host countries to these sport investments. "42 AIl this raises a set of important conceptual questions about the changing role of small states in international affairs.

As a regional "soft power master" as dubbed by one researcher43, it is important for the UAE to work to develop and improve its international status by various ways, including by improving the influence of Emirati products and cultural symbols, and their links to Emirati heritage, arts and cuisine. This will take place through a fusion between the three pillars of soft power and the manner in which they are measured: "place, people and product," or a I3P' soft power model. In the first pillar, focus is on the security of the country, its cultural and archaeological symbols and history, and their inclusion in the national narrative on people, place and geography. In the second pillar, the focus is placed on the friendliness and ethics of one's people, and the values they share with others. In the third pillar of this model, emphasis is placed on the power of local products and brands, and their reputation abroad. All of these elements are sources of soft power and attraction aiming to shape preferences of other people.

This model focuses on the sustainable localization of the pillars of soft power. It underlines the importance of industrialization and investment in advanced industries, not only for economic diversification away from the oil and gas industry, but also to build positive perceptions about the country's soft power and reputation, its products, scientific and knowledge development, attractive environment, and the opportunities it provides for innovation.

The Transition to a Middle Power

Since its establishment, the UAE's developmental (hard) state model - namely the acquisition of strategic assets - has facilitated its global integration; this, in turn, has allowed it to acquire soft power capabilities through its defense of the liberal international order. As their soft power elements develop, states gain more status and influence; therefore, ultimately, soft power is a prerequisite for reaching the status of a "middle power:"45

Nevertheless, as American political scientist Joseph Nye observes, "Soft power is not the solution to all problems. "46 Saddam Hussein's invasion of the State of Kuwait offered a harsh lesson regarding the potential threat faced by sovereign states and highlighted the limits of soft power in a troubled region. The acquisition of advanced weapons and military technologies therefore become a necessity rather than an option. In parallel, the Arab Gulf states concluded defense agreements with their Western allies - namely the United States, France and Britain.
However, the attacks of September 11, 2001, and the wars in Afghanistan and Iraq, created unfavorable public opinion toward US military involvement abroad, invoking serious concerns regarding America's security commitments in the Middle East, and especially in the Gulf region.

"As small states - or those surrounded by serious, extended and non-temporary threats - harbor strong fears of the possibility of the protecting powers abandoning them, coupled with the protector's fear of military involvement in external conflicts and deep-seated tension surrounding its allies and its quest of burden- sharing, the opportunity becomes ripe for a small state that is facing challenges from regional or international powers to develop military capabilities. And if the small state does not seize the opportunity, and instead seeks other options, such as searching for a new sponsor state or appeasing the enemy, it will not be able to become a middle power."

During his visit to the Middle East in July 2022 - the first since he took office - US President Joe Biden pointed out during his meeting with Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed that the UAE was the only Middle Eastern country that deployed its forces alongside the American forces in every international coalition the US has taken part in since "Desert Shield" (Desert Storm 1990-1991). President Biden also praised the constant close cooperation over decades in the two countries' joint mission to combat terrorism and violent extremism.

This means that it is essential for small states, or those threatened by powerful neighbors or adversaries, to pursue
bilateral security alliances with superior and committed powers in order to build relative military capabilities and play regional roles in which they combine soft and hard power (i.e., smart power). This strengthens the security strategies of the protector state and role in serving common interests. is consistent with the "burden-sharing" principle, in addition to its

This new stage in the power-shift cycle, from a small to middle power, necessitates significant adjustments in the internal and external affairs of a country undergoing this transformation. However, it is likely that small states that lack socio-political cohesion, or those whose elites have difficulty agreeing on political priorities and determinants, will not be able to achieve the required balance to capitalize on opportunities to become middle powers.

If small states do meet the conditions for active and mature participation in the power-shift cycle, they may have opportunities to fill power vacuums in their regions. To that end, they will have to adapt to the strategies of their main allies and embrace new military doctrines, and perhaps unconventional foreign policies, to confront multiple threats, achieve more influence in their neighborhoods and strengthen their power.

According to the 2020 Arab Youth Survey, young Arabs view the United States (46%), Saudi Arabia (39%) and the UAE (34%) as the most influential powers in the Arab region during the years 2015- 2020. In the wake of the war in Syria, Russia is also cited by 16% of respondents.
Despite its small size (83,600 km?) and population (about 10 million of whom more than 75% are expatriates), the UAE - which enjoys solid political and security stability, a strong economy and a forward-looking political leadership - has tried to build a power model that is based on both soft and hard tools. This has required strategic partnerships with major countries (the United States in particular) that, alone, are not sufficient to determine the success of the UAE's power-building drive. Western support (particularly American) for the UAE over the past three decades would not have achieved the desired results - in terms of protection and deterrence, capacity development, power- building and supporting the UAE's journey toward becoming middle power - had it not been for the desire and political will of the UAE to adopt a role in harmony with the international and regional strategies of the major Western powers. Consequently, a certain readiness to possess prerequisites relating to local human and financial resources, infrastructure and logistics is required for receiving Western/us assistance. Such readiness and the existence of these prerequisites are all linked to leadership and political will, and must be supported by societal cohesion that strengthens mutual trust and a stable alliance between the UAE and its Western allies. AIl of this has been materializing at time when a serious threat was posed by the Islamic Republic of Iran, and later Turkey, Qatar and political and extremist Islamist groups. It was evident that the UAE escape from the trap of ideologization, extremism and populist policies represented a leverage for an accelerating march of development thanks to the clear and firm policy of Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed toward terrorist groups and Islamist movements. This has been one of the pillars of the Emirati model's strength established by the late Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan. This will be explained in the 5th chapter.

The continuously developing partnership between the UAE and the US was particularly exemplary during the first decade of the third millennium. "The UAE has gone all-in," said Anthony Zinni, a former commander of all US forces in the Middle East. In light of the tense relations between the United States and some of its allies in the region, and Jordan and Egypt's preoccupation with domestic challenges, the UAE occupied a unique position in the region as a consequence of its alliance with the US.51

The UAE therefore represents an ideal case study of a small country responding to strategic challenges and shifts in the Middle East. Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed has shown a remarkable ability over the past decades "to read shifts in the balance of power and adjust to them, "52 according to Martyn Indyk, former US diplomat and foreign relations analyst. The Middle East has come a long way since the end of the Cold War; central and peripheral countries have undergone transformations, and shifts have occurred in the concept of power, its distribution and balance, resulting in strategic changes in priorities, interests and conflict.

Here, we might be in front of a clear example that reflects what is called in administrative science "transformational leadership" where leaders make a positive and fruitful qualitative leap in the march of their institutions, country or people. This sense was expressed by the Washington Institute for Near East Policy (WINEP) when it presented its highest honor - the Scholar-Statesman Award - to Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed in October 2021. On this occasion, WINEP Executive Director Dr. Robert Satloff referred to the element
of "statesmanship" in Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed, describing statesmanship as "the ability to take your people, your country and your nation...places they have never gone: "53

In the country's transition to a middle power, Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed realized the strategic returns inherent in turning the UAE into a regional hub for diplomacy and security. "In doing SO he has shifted the UAE's ambitions from the Gulf to being a peninsular power with ties extending east to Asia and west to Africa. With this expanded vision has come new partnerships, often in defiance of traditional solidarities. "54


Diversification Strategies

The Emirati leadership has always reiterated that diversification of the economy is an essential prerequisite for sustainable development, achieving attractive competitiveness and preparing for a better future.

In July 2022, in his first address to the nation since he became UAE President, Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan, said the UAE "possesses a distinguished wealth of young workforce. In addition, more than 200 nationalities are actively participating in the growth and development of our economy... diversifying our economy is a key strategic focus of our future plans. It is therefore necessary to accelerate economic development efforts to continue building a leading global economy, to enhance our competitiveness, and to D achieve the highest global rankings."
Moreover, Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed pointed out in his address that the UAE's "priorities also include further strengthening our people's capabilities in science and technology, and developing them further to benefit all economic areas and the society as a whole. Furthermore, the role of the private sector is pivotal and it must be further stimulated through constant collaboration and diverse opportunities to increase its contribution to the growth of the economy"

"Our responsibility is to secure a bright future for our youth... Our primary goal is the UAE and its people... Striving to empower them has always been and continues to be our nation's top priority. The main pillar for all our future plans is to make sure that our people have everything they need to have fulfilled, comfortable, and happy lives."55

Obviously, these policy pillars expressed by the UAE president were the result of thorough thinking and the accumulation of years of experience, and were being translated into action on the ground through various schemes. For instance, Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed employed vast capital reserves (2002-2008) to expand his country's strategies to build up a non-oil economy. In addition, the sovereign wealth fund called Mubadala - which was established in Abu Dhabi in 2002 - began its work to consolidate policies of sustainability and economic diversification in Abu Dhabi. Employing such tools, Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed led plans to "attract new industries, creating job opportunities that would help train the local population. He honed his progressive image by including women in his cabinet. Mubadala created an aerospace-and-aviation hub in Al Ain where 86 percent of the workers are women. "56
Mubadala expanded its activities to include investments in dozens of countries. This was in line with the directions of Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed and Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid to restructure the public administration, reduce bureaucracy, improve and organize services, imbed a new work culture and maximize the role of economic diplomacy in the UAE's foreign policy.

In fact, Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed's directives to restructure the Abu Dhabi National Oil Company (ADNOC) were not in conflict with the diversification trajectory. "The plan to carry out comprehensive restructuring of ADNOC to face shifts in the world energy industry, cope with local priorities and invest in a huge increase of production capacity have put the UAE in the ranks of big producers in the world. "57 This increased financial surplus (especially by the third decade of this century) which will push the diversification strategies forward. This, in turn, will make the process of liquidating oil capabilities (speeding up converting it to cash by speeding up production, investing in it, and meeting demand before it peaks and prices fall) a key juncture. And here is the irony of shifting toward clean energy and net zero emissions.58 Russia's war in Ukraine increased the debate about this irony. 
The UAE's economic diversification went hand in hand with expanding and diversifying the country's strategic partnerships with world powers and emerging economies. It is evident that Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed's vision - through this alignment between domestic and foreign policies - is taking the country toward adopting a more pluralistic and rich political identity. Diversification of revenue sources; diversification of arms sources, regional and international partnerships and foreign investments; and diversification of educational and religious content became political pillars for a new reality leading to a different future stage: A stage where work is under way to pave the ground for the post-oil era and efforts are intensified to make elements of comprehensive power in the Emirati model stronger and more competitive than before.


Development of Education

It is significant that the first and fastest decision taken by Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed when he assumed office as UAE president on May 14, 2022 was to restructure and modernize policies of the Emirati education sector. On May 22, 2022, an announcement was made about a new major restructuring of the Emirati education system. In addition, directives were issued to conduct comprehensive review of laws and policies related to education and the establishment of several bodies to support the development of this sector and plan for its future; this should be done while taking into consideration that students and future generations would need to acquire knowledge and new sets of skills that would be different and continuously evolving.

Establishing a qualitative educational system was an essential pillar in the "UAE Centennial Plan 2071" crafted by UAE President Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed Al Nahyan. For years, His Highness was clear in his call on Emirati youth and leaders to aspire for successful
developmental experiences such as those of Finland's experience in education or South Korea and Singapore's in development, scientific research and localizing technology. Such an inspiration was evident in His Highness's vision for the UAE centennial plan. According to the UAE cabinet website: "The centennial (plan) defines the most important characteristics of the targeted education which should be provided to ensure preparing and qualifying future generations to serve their society. The vision's objectives also include the development of education, with a focus on sciences, advanced technology, space, engineering, innovation, medical and health sciences, and instilling an Emirati moral values system in future generations, and how to be constructive, teach students principles to foresee the future, the culture of openness by teaching them history of other cultures and civilizations, and new languages such as Japanese, Chinese and Korean. Other educational measures include teaching students, mechanisms for discovering their individual talents early. On the institutional level, educational institutions are encouraged to be incubators of entrepreneurship and innovation and to be international research centers, enhance the system of continuing education, ensure that Emirati universities are among the best universities in the world which are attractive to students, academics and researchers from all over the world."61

Because any successful development model requires national human resources equipped with advanced skills and scientific knowledge, an essential part of developing the Emirati model in power-building requires paying more attention to education and scientific research to cope with rapid shifts in the fields of knowledge, technology, innovation and advanced solutions.
It is clear that "education is the key to fostering the development of peaceful and tolerant societies. However, it can also be a tool for political and religious radicalization, exploited by bad actors. Education not only reveals what a society believes at present, but also what it aspires to in the future. "62

While the UAE is developing strategically to secure a stake in the emerging world order, the country also realizes that education for tolerance and peaceful coexistence among different cultures and religions is critical for such a society. Emirati students are taught that national pride is closely associated with tolerance. 63 This applies for all curricula that should contribute to building a fast-changing global society. The emphasis on peace and religious tolerance in the Emirati curriculum manifests a dramatic change in the values that the UAE is seeking to instill in the next generation.

Any observer of UAE affairs can easily notice the centrality of the discourse encouraging moderation and tolerance, and rejecting extremism and terrorism in the country's vision, due to the impact of strategies built by Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed, who was described as "the real architect behind the Abraham Accords that changed the face of Middle East geopolitics: "

On the other hand, the UAE wants to localize advanced technology and stop settling for the role of only being a purchaser, and to advance national industries, giving special focus to the
"development of an essential defense industry to make the (UAE) more self-sufficient," according to UAE ambassador in Washington, Yousef Al-Otaiba. The ambassador said: "We want countries and companies to come here (the UAE) and establish industrial ventures... We want people to transfer their technology here. And we want people to develop their technology here: "AIl of this reflects the UAE's keenness to develop education, nurture creative ideas, turn these ideas into tools for professional and career advancement and grant individuals their privileged merits that entitle them to continuously learn and develop new skills all the time.

Comprehensive Sustainability and Self- Improvement

Based on what we have earlier said, it is evident that the national capacity-building and development process was coupled with the introduction of strategies of comprehensive sustainability. These two elements are key parts of Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed's vision for power-building and the creation of a better future. If we want to summarize what we have said, we can argue that Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed has deepened the nation's footprint over the past decades, whether during the stage of establishing the country while helping the founding father, the late Sheikh Zayed bin Sultan, or during the phase of empowerment led by the late Sheikh Khalifa bin Zayed. This footprint, which continues until the present time, focuses on certain areas of work, notably:

1. Building a modern UAE Army to safeguard and lead the country toward modernization and progress.

Expanding the size of the UAE economy and leading the country's development, construction and cultural revival over the past two decades. Abu Dhabi beaches, coasts, wave breaker, corniche and farther islands have become distinct and attractive features of the capital city, taking it to a new era. These mega projects reflect the rapid shifts that have been changing the face of Abu Dhabi over the past period, standing as living testimony to its economic development, urban expansion and cultural diversity. This multi- faceted boom was organized on the basis of modern laws, reforms and legislation. By the first decade of the current millennium, we have seen constant growth in the country's total output of non- oil sectors, especially trade, industry, construction, real estate, banking, insurance, business services and financial projects, led by Abu Dhabi and Dubai. All of this coincided with huge projects in infrastructure, services, construction and a flourishing re-export sector in light of rapid steps to enhance the country's status as regional financial center and an attractive location for investments and tourism6s. This was in line with a widening of the scope of the economic plans for the capital, which led to an expansion in the size of its economy, and an enhancement of the status of ADNOC in the development process, especially with the increase of oil prices in 2005. This stage constituted a valuable opportunity to fortify the economic status of the country through a new vision for the role of sovereign funds and foreign investments. The first steps were the development of infrastructure and logistic services, "building a campus of New York University, a franchise of the Louvre and a planned extension of the Guggenheim.  These steps were later on followed by the launch of investments in technology, digitalization and Artificial Intelligence (AI), as well as the establishment of the first AI university in the world in 2019, named Mohamed bin Zayed University for Artificial Intelligence (MBZUAI) (which has ranked 30th in the world in the CSRankings, or computer science rankings, which are intended to identify global institutions and faculty actively engaged in research in Al, computers, machine learning and natural languages processing"7). These continuously growing elements of soft power were signs of a new era for the UAE's role and its growing regional and international status. The contribution of Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed is evident as his reformist and strategic vision continues to lead the country toward being more impactful in shaping regional policies, of course based on stable, flourishing, productive and dynamic internal conditions. AIl of this naturally is the fruit of an optimistic strategic vision capable of turning challenges into opportunities. Bloomberg points out that "Mohammed bin Zayed has helped hone the UAE's image as a socially liberal, pro-business oasis. "71

3. Developing the contours of education and building a human capital that leads the UAE toward a knowledge-based economy, innovation and creativity.

4.  Laying the foundations for an institutional environment to enhance moderation, tolerance, co-existence, and interfaith dialogue, besides enhancing principles of "human fraternity," renouncing extremism and combating terrorism.

Expanding the UAE's regional and international relations network, building an agile, dynamic, and proactive Emirati diplomacy focused on securing the country's gains, expanding windows of opportunity, overcoming challenges, adapting rapidly to regional and international shifts, and showing flexibility in responding to changes. These measures have transformed the UAE from a small country on the margins of regional order into a constructive regional power with a substantial impact on shaping regional policies and presenting pioneering global initiatives. Such great strategic initiatives lead observers to say: "At times, he seems to want to change Emiratis themselves, to make his people more disciplined, more rational, more self-reliant. Therefore, one can notice that there is a clear realization by the UAE leadership that states' logic and behavior is different from the logic and behavior of individuals, and that the top function of modern state is to maintain its security, stability and the welfare of its people. This gets achieved through self-development and building of alliances. Any neglect of rules governing international relations eventually leads to state failure. A successful state is one that invests in its power and seeks to increase elements of this power, especially increasing the network of alliances. Sheikh Mohamed bin Zayed's Over the past three decades, vision to cement the UAE's position, status and entrepreneurship was based on a high degree of resilience and rapid adaptation to regional and international changes. Translating this vision into reality also required being proactive and flexible in order to consolidate positive thinking mechanisms attempting to turn challenges into opportunities, out of the belief that there are opportunities that are worth the risks involved, and that they might be missed by hesitation and unjustified caution.



